# GASP ALS Multi Layering Overlays - Hand IK - Free Unreal Project on GitHub (20250728)

Hello everyone. Welcome to yet another update on the gas payless project. So, this has been about a month since the last update and there has been a lot going on. So, um I'm really happy with everything that I'm going to show you and I hope that all of you guys are going to like it. Uh as always and since last time, there's a Discord uh server right now. So if you want to discuss the project, if you want to collaborate with the others or if you want to propose new things, please feel free to join the

discord. If you want to support the project, there's a buy me a coffee link. Um but uh yeah, let's jump in. So last time the project was updated to 5.6 and it has been moved to um a plug-in format so that it's easier to integrate into other projects. Uh now for this version the updates the first and big one is the separation between base poses and overlay poses. So now there's a Q

button and there's the E button. So the Q button is basically the pose. So you can see that it's different stances for the character. There's masculine stent, there's the feminine stand, there's the ALS stand, and there's the default gasp stance. And the E is basically the overlays. So the rifle, the pistol. And here you can see that we can combine both of them. So we can combine the feminine pose with the u pistol or the rifle pose. So this should uh give a lot of freedom in terms of how to use the

system. If you have different characters in your game, you don't have to have different sets of animation. For example, like Lyra does it. Lyra has entire sets for feminine and masculine. Here you can basically just have a character that is like strong and masculine and then you can put the overlay on top of it and it's going to work. uh just like magic. So really happy with this update. I think this is going to open a lot of possibilities um in terms of how to use the system uh

with multiple uh different characters. So um another update that was done is uh a simple transition animation when we're switching overlays or when we're switching base poses. And this is basically done so that the feet don't stick to the ground because before when we switch poses for example the rifle pose has uh the legs a little bit uh far away apart compared to other poses. So this makes it so that the the feets reposition themselves on the ground which gives a nice uh feeling to to the

to the character. Uh it doesn't happen if you're if you're moving. So you will not see that if you're moving, but it happens uh if you're standing so that the feet uh realign correctly. And the um another update that was done and this was a very very highly requested one is proper hand IK now. So the items now have proper IK. You can see that the hand for example here with the bow is sticking properly. Uh if we move to the rifle um you can see that

now the hand is properly placed even if you're aiming even if you're in p first person hand IK is done properly and I I'm going to show you how it works uh in a few. So you can see that the character is holding the gun properly. It's also working for the different characters. So if we take for example Quinn, we give her the uh feminine pose and the two hand weapon and it is working properly also with the different

uh items. So yeah, the system is pretty much ready right now. It has everything ALS had and even more I think. uh there may be some like minor things but it's actually doing a lot more than ALS was doing especially with the separation of the uh poses and the bases. So this should give a huge uh freedom in terms of how to use the system. If you have a, I don't know, an open world game with a bunch of

characters, you can basically just design different poses and then all those characters that use those different poses can actually still use the um overlays to hold items, hold weapons in their hands. Sweet. So now to show you uh a little bit how all of this is done. So if you go to the ABP character here in the anim graph, you will see that the hand IK before we were using a simple two bone IK. Now we're using fabric nodes. Um these fabric nodes are basically

moving the um uh bone to the transform that is selected here. There's these two functions. Get hand IK left, get hand IK right. Uh both of these are using this function here. Get hand IK transform. And if you go into this function, you will see that it's doing some things here. Basically, what it is doing is it's getting the um overlay skeletal mesh or static mesh depending on if the overlay item is a static mesh or skeletal mesh. And it's getting the uh

proper hand IK for example the bow. The bow is a weapon that we hold with the left hand. The hand IK uh is hand IK right. And for the M4, for example, it's a weapon that we hold with the right hand. So the hand IK is for the hand left. So this is how the system works. If you want to explore it, you can start from here. This is in the main animation blueprint and you can follow these two fabric nodes for the setup and then the functions are get hand IK left, get hand IK right and get hand IK transform.

Uh the second thing is the little transition animations. So the transition animations are done basically here if you go to the um overlay functions we have update overlay base and update overlay pose. So both of these functions in the end they are just playing this stand transition animation. That's all there is to it. So, whenever we switch um an overlay base or pose, it's playing this, which allows the feet to uh get unstuck from the ground and to

reposition correctly based on the overlay. Um, aside from this, the um, setup with the bases and the poses, that's a little bit a more complex one, but basically what we've done is uh, here, if you go into the, uh, the content folder of the plug-in, of course, and in overlay system, you will see that if you go into overlays, you will have two folders now, bases and poses. And if you go into bases, you will see that it has basically the same setup as for the others. So it has a um

a data asset an animation blueprint that inherits from ABP overlay based pose which is here and then the same setup for the poses um in the um layer blending. So if we go here into ABP layer blending this is where most of the changes are. So this is a slightly more complex system here where it's basically now has four inputs. uh the locomotion input which is coming from the motion matching and then we have the overlay base which is the feminine masculine ALS gasp. It has the overlay pose which is

the um rifle uh the torch etc. And then we have the input base pose which is like basically the base pose of the character and that one you can find it directly in here. If we go back to the anim the the main animraph you will see um there is a little state machine here for the base poses and all it does is it has the uh the base poses for the character the gas character. So you have the stand idle you have the stand move which are slightly different poses. Um

so uh yeah this is how um the system is right now. Um again there's the discord if you want to discuss these things or showcase what you guys are building with it. Uh we would be really happy. The discord is already over 200 people which is incredible. So please join the discord share your work. Uh if you want to collaborate the GitHub project is open uh for contributions. You can just make uh pull requests and we'll be happy to accept it if everything is all right and working properly. Um there will be uh

more cool stuff coming to the project but I think that the project is in a state where it is like really functional and really usable for uh actually building games on top of. Um there will be some other cool stuff coming. Uh I don't know if it's going to be in the gas al project or in other separate projects that are going to use gas als but yeah don't forget to subscribe and stay tuned. Uh, awesome stuff is coming as
